add indentation guide (#116)
sublimetext-io/docs.sublimetext.io: docs/guide/extensibility/indentation.md

---
title: Indentation
---

# Indentation

Sublime Text can perform automatic indentation when you type.
It can also reindent text according to the indentation rules on demand.

> Note that it will not perform auto-formatting, like adding newlines or adjusting spaces around parenthesis and the like. You would need an external tool or plugin for that.

Reviewer: Please consider adding more line breaks at positions that make sense semantically. I assume you're still in the process of revising this, however, since some sections already use shorter lines.

Reviewer 2: The plural is "parentheses."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that it will not perform auto-formatting,
like adding newlines or adjusting spaces around parentheses.
You would need an external tool or plugin for that.
```
Mostly fixing the plural of "parenthesis," but also breaking into phrases like the contributing docs ask.

The indentation rules consist of various regular expression patterns applied in different circumstances.
All the regular expression patterns match against one line of text.

## File Format

Indentation rules are defined using metadata files.
However, because metadata for indentation rules is complicated and
is commonly required by packages which add syntax definitions,

> it's discussed separately in this page

Reviewer: As a general style thing, I tend to refrain from using shortenings like "it's" in prose. But this is an optional thing and just an FYI. I will most likely do a full pass on the page once it's ready for a more detailed review and commit it directly.

for convenience.

Just as regular metadata files,
indentation metadata files
have the `.tmPreferences` extension
and use the Property List format.
The file name is ignored by Sublime Text.

::: info See Also
[Metadata](./metadata.md#indentation-options) Detailed documentation on indentation metadata.
:::

The scope selector is equivalent to the `eol_selector` context, wherein it works on the scope of the `\n` character at the end of the line.

## Indentation when pressing <kbd>Enter</kbd>

> The main aspect of auto indentation increasing the indent level occurs when pressing <kbd>Enter</kbd>, anywhere on a line.

Reviewer: We have a custom tag for key bindings. Usage is `<Key k="enter" />`.

Note that some keybindings override <kbd>Enter</kbd> with their own logic by inserting a snippet etc.
The `insert` command processes indentation logic, but the `insert_snippet` and `append` commands don't.

## All subsequent lines

Example: type an open HTML tag `<article>` or curly brace `{` and press <kbd>Enter</kbd>
This is handled by the `increaseIndentPattern` regex.

## A single line

Sometimes it is useful to indent just a single line further, for example when typing an if statement without an opening brace `if (x)` <kbd>Enter</kbd>. In this case, only the next line is indented, because the "if" will apply to only a single statement/line. Then, if a `{` is typed, it gets unindented again, because most people want their opening and closing braces in the same column as the start of the "if". See also the "Adjusting indentation when you type on a line" section.

This is also potentially useful for incomplete statements (split over multiple lines), for example some languages require statements to be terminated with a semi-colon `;`, and visually indenting them makes it more readable.
```js
    a.b().c.d.e.f

>         .g().h.i();

Reviewer: This is actually a bad example here because this exact use case breaks when a statement is broken over more than just two lines. A better idea would be to cover C-style bracket-less if statements.

```
as opposed to
```js
    a.b().c.d.e.f
    .g().h.i();
```

This is handled by the `bracketIndentNextLinePattern` regex - presumably the `bracket` part relates to the `{` behavior, although it is actually not hardcoded, and is instead overridden by a separate `disableIndentNextLinePattern` regex. The naming of this is perhaps a little confusing, because the disable regex applies to the "next line" - the one whose indentation was caused by the `bracketIndentNextLinePattern`. ST handles this by default in `Packages/Default/Indentation Rules.tmPreferences`.

### lines containing only whitespace and comments are ignored

The auto-indenter will ignore lines matching the `unIndentedLinePattern` regex when computing the next line's indentation level. This mainly seems to be used to ensure that `bracketIndentNextLinePattern` can affect multiple lines when the first line(s) is/are purely comment lines.

### other built-ins

> The user preference `indent_to_bracket` adds whitespace up to the first open bracket when indenting. It also affects unindenting too, the close paren is placed in the column after the open paren. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The user preference `indent_to_bracket` adds whitespace up to the first open bracket when indenting. It also affects unindenting, too; the close paren is placed in the column after the open paren. 
```
